parallel slopes coefficient interpretation (#54)
d-morrison/rme: Linear-models-overview.qmd

$$ E[Y|a,m] = \mu(a,m) = \beta_0 + \beta_M m + \beta_A a $$

Slope (of the mean with respect to age) for males:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{d}{da}\mu(a,1) &= \frac{d}{da}(\beta_0 + \beta_M 1 + \beta_A a)\\
&= \left(\frac{d}{da}\beta_0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_M 1 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_A a\right)\\
&= (0 + 0 + \beta_A) \\ 
&= \beta_A
\end{aligned}
$$

Slope for females:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{d}{da}\mu(a,0) &= \frac{d}{da}(\beta_0 + \beta_M 0 + \beta_A a)\\
&= \left(\frac{d}{da}\beta_0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_M 0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_A a\right)\\
&= (0 + 0 + \beta_A) \\ 
&= \beta_A
\end{aligned}
$$
:::

:::{#exr-interpret-age-slope}
What is the interpretation of $\beta_A$ in the model?
:::

:::{.solution}
Slope (of the mean with respect to age) for males:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{d}{da}\mu(a,m) &= \frac{d}{da}(\beta_0 + \beta_M m + \beta_A a)\\
&= \left(\frac{d}{da}\beta_0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_M m + \frac{d}{da}\beta_A a\right)\\
&= (0 + 0 + \beta_A) \\ 
&= \beta_A
\end{aligned}
$$

Conclusion:

$$\frac{d}{da}\mu(a,m) = \beta_A$$
:::

:::{.notes}
$\beta_A$ is the slope of mean birthweight with respect to gestational age, adjusting for sex.

Or we can plug in the definition of slope:

> $\beta_A$ is the difference in the mean value of birthweight that we would expect, for a one-unit difference in gestational age, adjusting for sex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$\beta_A$ is the difference in mean birthweight per one-unit difference in gestational age, adjusting for sex.
```

> $$\beta_A &= E[Y|m,a+1] - E[Y|m,a]$$

Reviewer: I think the `&=` alignment notation doesn't work outside of `aligned` contexts
```suggestion
$$\beta_A = E[Y|m,a+1] - E[Y|m,a]$$
```

Reviewer: @katyshea I think that `&` is the cause of this error in the quarto preview workflow:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/30658a94-6e6d-4233-b010-f41f2003a3ff)

Author: Oh, yup. Must've copied and pasted without paying attention

:::

---

#### Coefficient Interpretation

> :::{.notes}

Author: Not what I intended. I forgot about the slides completely

$$ E[Y|a,m] = \mu(a,m) = \beta_0 + \beta_M m + \beta_A a $$

Slope (of the mean with respect to age) for males:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{d}{da}\mu(a,1) &= \frac{d}{da}(\beta_0 + \beta_M 1 + \beta_A a)\\
&= \left(\frac{d}{da}\beta_0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_M 1 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_A a\right)\\
&= (0 + 0 + \beta_A) \\ 
&= \beta_A
\end{aligned}
$$

Slope for females:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{d}{da}\mu(a,0) &= \frac{d}{da}(\beta_0 + \beta_M 0 + \beta_A a)\\
&= \left(\frac{d}{da}\beta_0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_M 0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_A a\right)\\
&= (0 + 0 + \beta_A) \\ 
&= \beta_A
\end{aligned}
$$
:::

---

:::{#exr-interpret-age-slope}
What is the interpretation of $\beta_A$ in the model?
:::

:::{.solution}
Slope (of the mean with respect to age) for males:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{d}{da}\mu(a,m) &= \frac{d}{da}(\beta_0 + \beta_M m + \beta_A a)\\
&= \left(\frac{d}{da}\beta_0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_M m + \frac{d}{da}\beta_A a\right)\\
&= (0 + 0 + \beta_A) \\ 
&= \beta_A
\end{aligned}
$$

Conclusion:

$$\frac{d}{da}\mu(a,m) = \beta_A$$
:::

---

:::{.notes}
$\beta_A$ is the slope of mean birthweight with respect to gestational age, adjusting for sex.

Or we can plug in the definition of slope:

> $\beta_A$ is the difference in mean birthweight per one-unit difference in gestational age, adjusting for sex.

Reviewer: end speaker note here?

```suggestion
$\beta_A$ is the difference in mean birthweight per one-unit difference in gestational age, adjusting for sex:
:::
```

$$\beta_A = E[Y|m,a+1] - E[Y|m,a]$$
:::

> ---
> 
> :::{.notes}
> Exchangeability and consistency have not been assessed; so we are not discussing potential outcomes (causality), only observed outcomes.
> :::
> 
> ---

Reviewer: this is currently another notes-only slide; merge with previous and keep this comment as a speaker note?

```suggestion

:::{.notes}
Exchangeability and consistency have not been assessed; so we are not discussing potential outcomes (causality), only observed outcomes.
:::

---
```

:::{.notes}
More precisely written:
$$ 
E[Y|A=a,M=m] = \mu(a,m) = \bigg\{
\begin{matrix} 
\beta_0 + \beta_M m +\beta_A a, & \text{for} m\in {0,1} \\ 
\text{undefined}, & \text{for} m \notin {0,1}
\end{matrix}
$$
The model is undefined for $m\neq \{0,1\}$, so the derivative with respect to $m$ doesn't exist.
:::

---

:::{#thm-beta-m-interpretation}
$$ \beta_M = E[Y|a,1] - E[Y|a,0] $$
In words: $\beta_M$ is the difference in mean birthweight between males and females adjusting for age.
:::

:::{.proof}
$$
\begin{aligned}
E[Y|a,1] &= \beta_0 + \beta_M 1 + \beta_A a \\
& = \beta_0 + \beta_M + \beta_A a \\
E[Y|a,0] &= \beta_0 + \beta_M 0 + \beta_A a \\
& = \beta_0 + \beta_A a
\end{aligned}
$$
So: 
$$
\begin{aligned}
E[Y|a,1] - E[Y|a,0] &= (\beta_0 + \beta_M + \beta_A a) - (\beta_0 + \beta_A a) \\
&= \beta_M
\end{aligned}
$$
:::

---

:::{#exr-interpret-intercept}
$\beta_0 = ?$
:::

> 

Reviewer: let's put slide breaks between exercises/theorems and solutions/proofs:

```suggestion

---

```

:::{.solution}

> $\beta_0$ is the mean birthweight for a female with gestational age 0 weeks.
> 
> $$
> \begin{aligned}
> E[Y|0,0] &= \beta_0 + \beta_M 0 + \beta_A 0\\
> &= \beta_0
> \end{aligned}
> $$

Reviewer: rearrange to derivation then conclusion?

```suggestion
$$
\begin{aligned}
\E{Y|0,0} &= \beta_0 + \beta_M 0 + \beta_A 0\\
&= \beta_0
\\ \beta_0 &= \E{Y|0,0}
\end{aligned}
$$

::: notes
$\beta_0$ is the mean birthweight for a female with gestational age 0 weeks.
:::

```

$$

---

:::{#exr-interpret-age-slope}
What is the interpretation of $\beta_A$ in [Model @eq-lm-parallel]?
:::

---

:::{.solution}
$\beta_A$ is the slope of mean birthweight (with respect to gestational age), holding sex constant:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{d}{da}\mu(a,m) &= \frac{d}{da}(\beta_0 + \beta_M m + \beta_A a)\\
&= \left(\frac{d}{da}\beta_0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_M m + \frac{d}{da}\beta_A a\right)\\
&= (0 + 0 + \beta_A) \\ 
&= \beta_A
\end{aligned}
$$

Conclusion:

$$\beta_A = \frac{d}{da}\mu(a,m)$$
:::

:::{.notes}
$\beta_A$ is the slope of mean birthweight with respect to gestational age, adjusting for sex.

Or we can plug in the definition of slope:

$\beta_A$ is the difference in mean birthweight per one-unit difference in gestational age, adjusting for sex:
:::
$$\beta_A = E[Y|m,a+1] - E[Y|m,a]$$

:::{.notes}
Exchangeability and consistency have not been assessed; so we are not discussing potential outcomes (causality), only observed outcomes.
:::

---

More precisely written:
$$ 
\E{Y|A=a,M=m} = \mu(a,m) = \bigg\{
\begin{matrix} 
\beta_0 + \beta_M m +\beta_A a, & \text{for } m\in \set{0,1} \\ 
\text{undefined}, & \text{for } m \notin \set{0,1}
\end{matrix}
$$

> The model is undefined for $m \notin \set{0,1}$, so the derivative with respect to $m$ doesn't exist.

Author: Move to beginning of section?

Reviewer: > Move to beginning of section?

I think it belongs at the beginning of the solution below (in a `notes` div); it explains why we can't take the derivative to find $\beta_M$

&= \left(\frac{d}{da}\beta_0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_M 1 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_A a\right)\\
&= (0 + 0 + \beta_A) \\ 
&= \beta_A
\end{aligned}
$$

Slope for females:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{d}{da}\mu(a,0) &= \frac{d}{da}(\beta_0 + \beta_M 0 + \beta_A a)\\
&= \left(\frac{d}{da}\beta_0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_M 0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_A a\right)\\
&= (0 + 0 + \beta_A) \\ 
&= \beta_A
\end{aligned}
$$

---

:::{#exr-interpret-age-slope}
What is the interpretation of $\beta_A$ in [Model @eq-lm-parallel]?
:::

---

:::{.solution}

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{d}{da}\mu(a,m) &= \frac{d}{da}(\beta_0 + \beta_M m + \red{\beta_A} a)\\
&= \left(\frac{d}{da}\beta_0 + \frac{d}{da}\beta_M m + \frac{d}{da}\red{\beta_A} a\right)\\
&= (0 + 0 + \red{\beta_A}) \\ 
&= \red{\beta_A}
\end{aligned}
$$

Conclusion:

$$\beta_A = \frac{d}{da}\mu(a,m)$$
:::

:::{.notes}
$\beta_A$ is the slope of mean birthweight with respect to gestational age, adjusting for sex.

Or we can plug in the definition of slope:
:::
$$\beta_A = E[Y|m,a+1] - E[Y|m,a]$$

:::{.notes}
Exchangeability and consistency have not been assessed; so we are not discussing potential outcomes (causality), only observed outcomes.
:::

---

> More precisely written:
> $$ 
> \E{Y|A=a,M=m} = \mu(a,m) = \bigg\{
> \begin{matrix} 
> \beta_0 + \beta_M m +\beta_A a, & \text{for } m\in \set{0,1} \\ 
> \text{undefined}, & \text{for } m \notin \set{0,1}
> \end{matrix}
> $$
> The model is undefined for $m \notin \set{0,1}$, so the derivative with respect to $m$ doesn't exist.

Author: ```suggestion
:::{.notes}
More precisely written:
$$ 
\E{Y|A=a,M=m} = \mu(a,m) = \bigg\{
\begin{matrix} 
\beta_0 + \beta_M m +\beta_A a, & \text{for } m\in \set{0,1} \\ 
\text{undefined}, & \text{for } m \notin \set{0,1}
\end{matrix}
$$
The model is undefined for $m \notin \set{0,1}$, so the derivative with respect to $m$ doesn't exist.
:::
```

---

:::{#thm-beta-m-interpretation}
$$ \beta_M = E[Y|a,1] - E[Y|a,0] $$
In words: $\beta_M$ is the difference in mean birthweight between males and females adjusting for age.
:::

:::{.proof}
$$
\begin{aligned}
E[Y|a,1] &= \beta_0 + \beta_M 1 + \beta_A a \\
& = \beta_0 + \beta_M + \beta_A a \\
E[Y|a,0] &= \beta_0 + \beta_M 0 + \beta_A a \\
& = \beta_0 + \beta_A a
\end{aligned}
$$
So: 
$$
\begin{aligned}
E[Y|a,1] - E[Y|a,0] &= (\beta_0 + \beta_M + \beta_A a) - (\beta_0 + \beta_A a) \\
&= \beta_M
\end{aligned}
$$

> :::

Reviewer: convert to exercise + solution?

$$
\ba

> E[Y|M = 1, X_2 = 36]

Reviewer: are these $X_2$s supposed to be $A$ (age)? (I realize this section wasn't originally part of this PR; just noticed as I reviewed your changes)

Author: Yes, I think so. I just noticed when I was checking through my notation that this one had an A in the wrong spot, so I changed it. I didn't change the X2 because I wasn't sure if that was a different notation on purpose or not

Reviewer: ok, I logged this as a separate issue (#91); we can deal with it later (or next year...)

:::

---

#### Coefficient Interpretation

> 

Reviewer: add exercise for $\beta_M$ in interaction model?

::: {#exr-interaction-coef}
What is the interpretation of $\beta_{AM}$?
:::

::: {.solution}

> $\beta_{AM}$ is the difference in slope of mean birthweight with respect to gestational age between males and females.

Reviewer: as above; move conclusion to end of solution? I could be convinced the current ordering is better; we can discuss when we meet tomorrow

Slope among males:
$$
\begin{aligned}
 E[Y|a+1,1] - E[Y|a,1] = &\beta_0 + \beta_M 1 + \beta_A(a+1) + \beta_{AM}1(a+1)\\ 
  &- (\beta_0 + \beta_M 1 + \beta_A(a) + \beta_{AM}1(a))\\
 = &\beta_A + \beta_{AM}
 \end{aligned}
$$

Slope among females:
$$
\begin{aligned}
 E[Y|a+1,0] - E[Y|a,0] = &\beta_0 + \beta_M0 + \beta_A(a+1) + \beta_{AM}0(a+1) \\
 &- (\beta_0 + \beta_M 0 + \beta_A(a) + \beta_{AM}0(a))\\
 = &\beta_0 + \beta_A(a+1) - (\beta_0 + \beta_A(a))\\
 = &\beta_A 
\end{aligned}
$$

Difference in slopes:
$$
\begin{aligned}
 (E[Y|a+1,1] - E[Y|a,1]) - (E[Y|a+1,0] - E[Y|a,0]) &= \beta_A + \beta_{AM} - \beta_A\\
 &= \beta_{AM}

> \end{aligned}

Reviewer: switch to, or add, derivative version?

$$
:::

#### Compare coefficient interpretations

> :::{.notes .smaller}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{#tbl-compare-coef-interps}
```

- table goes on slide, not just in speaker notes
- I really wish the `.smaller` tag worked on tables, but I don't think it does; seems to be an unimplemented feature: https://github.com/quarto-dev/quarto-cli/issues/1153

>   $\mu(a,s)$    | $\beta_0 + \beta_M m + \beta_A a$ | $\beta_0 + \beta_M m + \beta_A a + \beta_{AM} ma$

Reviewer: I created some color macros that we can use to highlight important parts of equations:

```suggestion
  $\mu(a,s)$    | $\beta_0 + \beta_M m + \beta_A a$ | $\beta_0 + \beta_M m + \beta_A a + \red{\beta_{AM} ma}$
```

----------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------
  $\beta_0$     | $E[Y\mid a,1] - E[Y\mid a,0]$      | $E[Y\mid A=0,1] - E[Y\mid A=0,0]$
  $\beta_A$     | $E[Y\mid a+1,m] - E[Y\mid a,m]$    | $E[Y\mid a+1,0] - E[Y\mid a,0]$
  $\beta_M$     | $E[Y\mid a,1] - E[Y\mid a,0]$      | $E[Y\mid A=0,1] - E[Y\mid A=0,0]$

>   $\beta_{AM}$  |                                    | $\begin{aligned}(&E[Y\mid a+1,1] - E[Y\mid a,1])\\ &- (E[Y\mid a+1,0] - E[Y\mid a,0])\end{aligned}$

Reviewer: switch to difference of slopes (derivatives) version?

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Coefficient interpretations, by model structure

:::
```

:::

---

#### Coefficient Interpretation
::: {#exr-male-coef-intxn-model}
What is the interpretation of $\beta_{M}$?
:::

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

---

```
please add slide breaks before each exercise and between each exercise and corresponding solution, so that I can put the exercises up on the screen by themselves, and the solutions are on the following slide

::: {.solution}
\ 

Mean birthweight among males with gestational age 0 weeks:
$$
\ba
\mu(0,1) &= \E{Y|A = 0,M = 1}\\
&= \b_0 + \red{\b_M} \cdot 1 + \b_A \cdot 0 + \b_{AM}\cdot 1 \cdot 0\\
&= \b_0 + \red{\b_M}
\ea
$$
Mean birthweight among females with gestational age 0 weeks:
$$
\ba
\mu(0,0) &= \E{Y|A = 0,M = 0}\\
&= \b_0 + \red{\b_M} \cdot 0 + \b_A \cdot 0 + \b_{AM}\cdot 0 \cdot 0\\
&= \b_0
\ea
$$

$\beta_{M} = \mu(0,1) - \mu(0,0)$ is the difference in mean birthweight between males with gestational age 0 weeks and females with gestational age 0 weeks.
:::

::: {#exr-interaction-coef}
What is the interpretation of $\beta_{AM}$?
:::

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

---

```
